Docs: Containerized plugins usage (#23186)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/plugins/containerized-plugins.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Containerized Plugins (Beta)
description: Running external plugins for Vault in containers.
---

> # Containerized Plugins (Beta)

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we usually include the beta in the page title, but more as a note in the body?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Containerized plugins (Beta)
```

> # Containerized Plugins (Beta)

Author: My initial aim when writing this page was to write reference documentation and that's reflected in the positioning of the page within the sidebar. However, quite a lot of it ended up being how-to. Maybe I should split it into 2 pages?

If running on Linux, Vault can optionally run external plugins in containers.
This provides increased levels of isolation between the plugin and Vault, as
well as the plugin and other plugins, compared to the default behavior of
running plugins as a sub-process with the same user and environment variables
as Vault.

## Prerequisites

* Linux. Containerized plugin support is currently limited to Linux.

* Local Docker Engine API available to Vault. Vault uses the
  [Docker SDK](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/docker/docker) to manage containerized
  plugins, which means it needs access to a Docker Engine API. This could be
  backed by Docker, Podman, or any other Docker-compatible container engines.
  Use the `DOCKER_HOST` environment variable to configure a custom address.

* (Optional) gVisor installed and configured as a runtime. Vault uses gVisor's

>   runsc container runtime by default. However, it can also be configured to use
>   other runtimes such as Docker's default, runc. In addition to the
>   [official installation instructions](https://gvisor.dev/docs/user_guide/install/),
>   runsc requires an additional runtime argument to enable Unix domain socket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `runsc` container runtime by default. However, it can also be configured to use
  other runtimes such as Docker's default, `runc`. In addition to the
  [official installation instructions](https://gvisor.dev/docs/user_guide/install/),
  `runsc` requires an additional runtime argument to enable Unix domain socket
```

  communication between Vault and the plugin: `--host-uds=all`.
  For example, if using Docker, `daemon.json` will look like so:

  ```json
  {
    "runtimes": {
      "runsc": {
        "path": "/usr/local/bin/runsc",
        "runtimeArgs": [
          "--host-uds=all"
        ]
      }
    }
  }
  ```

* Any plugin container images must be pulled and already available locally.
  Vault does not currently support pulling images as part of the plugin
  registration process.

## Running containerized plugins

### Installation

1. Install a container engine, for example:
    * [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/)

>     * Or [rootless Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/)

Author: That's a maturity question we'll answer properly when we make the feature GA.

> 2. [Install runsc](https://gvisor.dev/docs/user_guide/install/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Install `runsc`](https://gvisor.dev/docs/user_guide/install/)
```

> 3. Configure runsc to allow Unix sockets between the host and plugin, updating
>    the runsc install location if you didn't use the default:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Configure `runsc` to allow Unix sockets between the host and plugin, updating
   the `runsc` install location if you didn't use the default:
```

        ```
    
    b. Rootless Docker install:
        ```bash
        mkdir -p ~/.config/docker
        tee ~/.config/docker/daemon.json  <<EOF
        {
          "runtimes": {
            "runsc": {
              "path": "/usr/local/bin/runsc",
              "runtimeArgs": [
                "--host-uds=all"
                "--ignore-cgroups"
              ]
            }
          }
        }
        EOF
        systemctl --user restart docker
        ```

### Building plugin container images

To be compatible with running in a container, plugins must be built with at
least v1.5.0 of [go-plugin](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin). This can
be pulled in directly via `go get github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin@latest`, or
through the SDK from at least v0.10.0: `go get github.com/hashicorp/vault/sdk@latest`.

Plugin container images should run a binary the same way it would be expected
to run as a plain plugin process. For most plugins this simply means running
the binary as the entrypoint. For example, for the KV plugin:

1. Build the binary
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/hashicorp/vault-plugin-secrets-kv.git
    cd vault-plugin-secrets-kv/

>     GOOS=linux go build -o kv cmd/vault-plugin-secrets-kv/main.go

Reviewer: `CGO_ENABLED=0` ?

    ```

1. Create the following `Dockerfile`:
    ```Dockerfile
    FROM gcr.io/distroless/static-debian12

    COPY kv /bin/kv

    ENTRYPOINT [ "/bin/kv" ]
    ```

> 1. Build the image:
>     ```bash
>     docker build -t hashicorp/vault-plugin-secrets-kv .
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
1. Build the image:
    ```shell-session
    docker build -t PATH/TO/THE/PLUGIN/BINARY .
    ```
````

I'm not entirely clear from the previous steps what the build path is supposed to be. It it a path to the compiled binary or something else? For what it's worth, this is why generalizing is useful for example code, it helps folks note how the commands are related :)

Style correction: use `shell-session` for bash code, generalize example commands when possible

Reviewer 2: @schavis `hashicorp/vault-plugin-secrets-kv` is the "tag" being given to the image by the `docker build -t` command (-t for tag). The tag is a human-readable ID given to the image. The build path is specified by the `.` which means the current working directory.

> The image entrypoint, command, and environment can be further configured at
> registration time by using the `-command`, `-args`, and `-env` flags for
> `vault plugin register`.
> 
> ### Registration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Register the plugin

<Tip>

Use the `-command`, `-args`, and `-env` flags to further customize the entrypoint,
command, and environment for your plugin.

</Tip>

```

> Once Vault has a suitable container runtime available, the remaining steps are
> very similar to registering and using other external plugins. The config setting
> for [`plugin_directory`](/vault/docs/configuration#plugin_directory) is not required
> for containerized plugins, but any plugin containers must already be available
> locally when mounted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you containerize the plugins, registering them with Vault is similar to
registering any other external plugins as long as the containers are available
locally when mounted.
```
Focus on what is required rather than what is not required since we're outlining steps the reader should take

Style correction: write in active voice,

1. Store the SHA256 of the plugin image:

>     ```bash
>     SHA256="$(docker images --no-trunc --format="{{ .ID }}" hashicorp/vault-plugin-secrets-kv | cut -d: -f2)"

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
    ```shell-session
    $ SHA256="$(docker images --no-trunc --format="{{ .ID }}" PATH/TO/PLUGIN/IMAGE | cut -d: -f2)"
````

    ```

> 1. Register a plugin, specifying your container image as `-oci_image`:
>     ```bash
>     vault plugin register \
>         -sha256="$SHA256" \
>         -oci_image=hashicorp/vault-plugin-secrets-kv \
>       secret kv-container
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
1. Register the plugin with `vault plugin register` and specify your container image with `-oci_image`:
    ```shell-session
    $ vault plugin register \
        -sha256="$SHA256" \
        -oci_image=PATH/TO/PLUGIN/IMAGE \
      secret CONTAINER_NAME
    ```
````

Style correction: write in active voice, generalize example commands

1. Enable the plugin:

>     ```bash
>     vault secrets enable kv-container
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
    ```shell-session
    vault secrets enable CONTAINER_NAME
    ```
````

Reviewer 2: @schavis I am curious about this pattern. It makes someone following these steps unable to simply copy and paste commands. They must also edit the `CONTAINER_NAME`. In my experience it is more preferable to not have to modify the command at all when I just want to get something running.

Reviewer 3: Given that the kv plugin is just an example and not the only plugin folks may need to follow these steps for, the need to edit the line is true regardless. Using an obviously named placeholder makes the text more accessible to a broad range of readers because it makes it more obvious what information they need to provide and helps readers make connections between commands to see how the steps are related.

Reviewer 2: @schavis Thanks for the reply! I can definitely see your point. I wonder if a good compromise would be to use an actual shell variable in the commands and set it at the beginning? Similar to what we do with SHA256? Something like

```bash
NAME=kv-container
TAG=hashicorp/vault-plugin-secrets-kv
$ # step 1 ...
$ vault plugin register \
        -sha256="$SHA256" \
        -oci_image="$TAG" \
      secret "$NAME"
$ vault secrets enable "$NAME"
```

That way anyone that wants to directly follow along can do so without any modifactions. And others can just modify a few shell variables.

Anyway, just a thought and I will of course differ to your expertise in this area 😄

> 1. You can now interact with it like any other plugin:
>     ```shell-session
>     $ vault kv put -mount=kv-container hello subject=containers
>     Success! Data written to: kv-container/hello
> 
>     $ vault kv get -mount=kv-container hello
>     ===== Data =====
>     Key        Value
>     ---        -----
>     subject    containers
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion

## Step 4: Test your plugin

Now that the container is registered with Vault, you should be able to interact
with it like any other plugin.

1. Write a secret to your new plugin:
   ```shell-session
   $ vault PLUGIN_NAME put -mount=my-container hello subject=containers
   Success! Data written to: my-container/hello
   ```

1. Fetch the secret you just wrote:
   ```shell-session
   $ vault PLUGIN_NAME get -mount=my-container hello
   ===== Data =====
   Key        Value
   ---        -----
   subject    containers
   ```
````

It's always good to make test steps explicit so folks know it's not part of the setup

> 

Reviewer 3: What are some relevant next steps we can add here as a "Next steps" section? Are there other docs or tutorials we can suggest the look at for additional customization or better understanding?

> ### Container lifecycle and metadata

Reviewer 3: Everything between here and the Podman instructions should be a separate overview document since we're discussing how the plugins work rather than providing explicit instructions for how to do something.

Author: Oh I didn't read this before my comment above. WDYT about where the two documents belong? I think where this document currently is is a good place for reference documentation. Would you put the how-to guide alongside it or somewhere else in the tree entirely?

Like any other external plugin, Vault will automatically manage the lifecycle

> of plugin containers. If they are killed out of band, Vault will restart it
> before servicing any requests that need to be handled by it. Vault will also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of plugin containers. If they are killed out of band, Vault will restart them
before servicing any requests that need to be handled by them. Vault will also
```

Vault labels each plugin container with a standard set of metadata to help
identify the owner of the container, including the cluster ID, Vault's own
process ID, and the plugin's name, type, and version.

## Plugin runtimes

Users who require more control over plugin containers can use the new "plugin
runtime" APIs for finer grained settings. See the CLI documentation for
[`vault plugin runtime`](/vault/docs/commands/plugin/runtime) for more details.

## Supported configurations

Vault's containerized plugins are compatible with a variety of configurations.
In particular, it has been tested with the following:

* Docker and Podman
* Default and rootless installations
* OCI runtimes runsc and runc
* Plugin container images with root and non-root users

Not all combinations work, and some have some limitations, listed below:

### Rootless installation with non-root image user

Not currently supported. We are hoping to provide limited support in future.

### Rootless installation with runsc

Works, but does not currently support cgroup limits, and requires  passing an
additional `--ignore-cgroups` flag to the runsc runtime.

> ## Podman

Reviewer 3: If the process is as similar as we imply, we should fold the Podman steps into the guide rather than putting it at the end where it could easily be missed.

Author: My main hesitation here was that it felt overwhelming to present 4 different options concurrently. Would you prefer to split this into multiple smaller guides, or present it all together?

Reviewer 3: The general rule of thumb is to keep things together and use tabs to separate versions of the same instructions (at least until we get variants for docs). It's better for SEO and it lets readers know their full set of options, instead of hoping they'll find a second version of the same doc with different instructions for the same thing.
